Initial refactor. (#65)
ietf-tapswg/draft-ietf-taps-transport-security: draft-ietf-taps-transport-security.md

---

> title: A Survey of the Interaction Between Security Protocols and Transport Services

Author: ❤️

the dependencies security protocols have upon transport protocols can guide implementations in determining
which transport protocols are appropriate to be able to use beneath a given security protocol. For example,
a security protocol that expects to run over a reliable stream of bytes, like TLS, restrict the set of transport
protocols that can be used to those that offer a reliable stream of bytes.

Defining the common interfaces that security protocols provide to applications also allows interfaces to be
designed in a way that common functionality can use the same APIs. For example, many security protocols
that provide authentication let the application be involved in peer identity validation. Any interface to use
a secure transport protocol stack thus needs to allow applications to perform this action during connection
establishment.

## Non-Goals

While this survey provides similar analysis to that which was performed for transport protocols in {{?RFC8095}},
it is important to distinguish that the use of security protocols requires more consideration.

It is not a goal to allow software implementations to automatically switch between different security protocols,

> even where their interfaces to transport and applications is equivalent. Even between versions, security

Reviewer: s/is/are/

Reviewer 2: Fixed!

transport security protocols: confidentiality, privacy protections, and agility. Such protocols are thus
omitted from this survey.

## Goals

[[TODO: writeme]]

## Non-Goals

[[TODO: writeme]]

> 

Reviewer 3: I don't think these will be explicit sections, more like "we need to make the scope of the draft clear --> state goals and non-goals". But I'm sure we'll figure that out as text gets written or rephrased.

Author: Yeah, this is just a reminder for us to do that later.

Reviewer 2: I think they actually do flow well as sections. Take a look!

Author: I think the new content looks good!

- Server: the peer responsible for responding to a session initiation.

> # Transport Security Protocol Descriptions

Reviewer 3: For the section that describes the protocols, I wrote down that we first wanted some introductory text that describes the "architecture", i.e., "so far, security protocols have been implemented in different parts of the protocol stack, that's why we sort them into four categories" (the ones Tommy put in #64).
So we could put a TODO marker for this "architectural text" here.

Then, I think we wanted four subsections, which are the mentioned categories, and then list the protocols within these subsections -- but moving the protocols around should perhaps be another PR to make these changes easier to follow.

Author: I didn't categorize the protocols in this PR. We can do that in a followup change!

Reviewer 2: I did the categories in my commit!

- Server: the peer responsible for responding to a session initiation.

# Transport Security Protocol Descriptions

This section contains brief descriptions of the various security protocols currently used to protect data

> being sent over a network. The interfaces between these protocols and transports is described

Reviewer: s/is/are/ in both this and the next line. "interfaces (subordinate clause...) are"

Reviewer 2: Fixed!

- Server: the peer responsible for responding to a session initiation.

# Transport Security Protocol Descriptions

This section contains brief descriptions of the various security protocols currently used to protect data
being sent over a network. The interfaces between these protocols and transports is described
in {{transport-interface}}; the interfaces between these protocols and applications is described in
{{application-interface}}.

## Application Payload Security Protocols

The following protocols provide security that protects application payloads sent over a
transport. They do not specifically protect any headers used for transport-layer functionality.

### TLS

> TLS (Transport Layer Security) {{?RFC8446}} is a common protocol used to establish a securesession between two endpoints. Communication

Author: ```suggestion
TLS (Transport Layer Security) {{?RFC8446}} is a common protocol used to establish a secure session between two endpoints. Communication
```

negotiate protocol options, such as cryptographic algorithms, and derive session-specific
keying material. The record protocol is used to marshal (possibly encrypted) data from one
peer to the other. This data may contain handshake messages or raw application data.

### DTLS

DTLS (Datagram Transport Layer Security) {{?RFC6347}} is based on TLS, but differs in that
it is designed to run over unreliable datagram protocols like UDP instead of TCP.
DTLS modifies the protocol to make sure it can still provide the same security guarantees as TLS
even without reliability from the transport. DTLS was designed to be as similar to TLS as possible,
so this document assumes that all properties from TLS are carried over except where specified.

## Application-Specific Security Protocols

The following protocols provide application-specific security by protecting
application payloads used for specific use-cases. Unlike the protocols above,
these are not intended for generic application use.

### Secure RTP

Secure RTP (SRTP) is a profile for RTP that provides confidentiality,
message authentication, and replay protection for RTP data packets

> and RTP control protocol (RTCP) packets [RFC3711].

Author: ```suggestion
and RTP control protocol (RTCP) packets {{?RFC3711}}.
```

Once a session is disconnected all session keying material must be destroyed, with
the exception of secrets previously established expressly for purposes of session resumption.
TLS supports stateful and stateless resumption. (Here, "state" refers to bookkeeping on a per-session basis
by the server. It is assumed that the client must always store some state information in order to resume a session.)

### Security Features

- Forward-secure session key establishment.
- Cryptographic algorithm negotiation.
- Stateful and stateless cross-connection session resumption.
- Session caching and management.
- Peer authentication (Certificate, raw public key, and pre-shared key).
- Unilateral responder authentication.
- Mutual authentication.
- Application authentication delegation.
- Record (channel) confidentiality and integrity.
- Record replay prevention.
- Application-layer feature negotiation.
- Configuration extensions.
- Early data support (starting with TLS 1.3).
- Optional record-layer padding (starting with TLS 1.3).

### Protocol Dependencies

- In-order, reliable bytestream transport.
- (Optionally) A PKI trust store for certificate validation.

> 

Reviewer 3: Agree to delete the detailed protocol descriptions - But did we really want to delete all the security features and protocol dependencies?
For the security features, probably yes, because we want people to read the RFCs/other sources to understand the protocols, and we don't want people to think that protocols with the same features are equivalent.
For the protocol dependencies, I'm less sure - we moved transport dependencies to a section below, but we lose some detail there, like "SRTP can run over TCP and UDP". And what about other dependencies, like Path MTU discovery or external key management? Could listing these dependencies still be useful for somebody implementing a Transport System?
Because I'm unsure, I'd consider keeping these protocol dependencies for now. But if you're sure, feel free to delete them.

Author: Yes, I think so. The dependencies are listed below, and the features aren't what we want to express to applications.

IP packets or Ethernet frames within a secure tunnel and can run over UDP or
TCP.

> # Transport Dependencies

Reviewer 3: Some of these protocols can run over either Stream or Datagram protocols, right? I suggest to add some nuance here in the future, and before we actually write that text, maybe keep the "Protocol dependencies" (see comment above).

Author: 👍

Reviewer 2: Filled out this section.

- Stream
Protocols: TLS, OpenVPN, tcpcrypt

- Datagram message framing
Protocols: QUIC, DTLS, SRTP, IKEv2 and ESP, WireGuard, MinimalT, CurveCP

- Protocol-specific needs
Protocols: tcpcrypt (TCP-ENO)

> # Application Interface

Reviewer 3: I think we also wanted some additional text here on how an application can explicitly choose a specific security protocol, how this needs to be explicit because the application should be aware of the limitations of the protocol, but how it should also be possible for an application to say that it considers multiple security protocol as equivalent.
So I'd put a TODO marker here.

Author: Sure, we can add a TODO here.

Reviewer 2: I'm describing this in the goals/non-goals
